README.md, before:

# So You Want to Vote in Fascist America

2020 is a difficult year to have a U.S. presidential election. Between the Covid-19 pandemic and voter disenfrancisement, we’re facing an election season full of fear and confusion. I compiled this document and a [companion list of resources](./sources-and-resources.md) to try to cut through that confusion and give others a place to start planning their vote.

**The information here was not compiled in a vacuum, and it is *not* comprehensive.** There are questions I have not thought to ask, and scenarios I have not considered. For transparency, some notes about me: I only have lived experience with voting in Illinois and Massachusetts. I am white and Mexican, and genderqueer. I have:

* never been homeless;
* never had a police record;
* never had a problem getting an ID;
* never had to ask for time off to vote;
* never been told at my polling place that I was not registered or allowed to vote.

I am liberal in my politics, and I write this now because I see American democracy threatened by fascism. I think it’s important that we vote Trump out of office, and that we give Democrats the congressional power to undo the damage he’s wrought. But I also believe it’s important to give *everyone* the information to vote, even if you’re voting for Trump. [I hope you don’t.](./why-now.md) But our right to vote is threatened now even more than usual, and this year, *everyone* needs to plan how to exercise that right.

Again, **this information is not comprehensive.** I plan to update these documents when I can (there’s a record of my changes [here](https://github.com/amclark42/so-youre-planning-to-vote-2020/commits/main)). Even so, check the rules of your local election authority, and whenever you can, confirm that my information is correct. Misinformation about the election is not just abundant but being intentionally spread. I’m not an exception; I reblogged Russian propaganda in 2016. I encourage you to check my work.


## Make sure you’re registered

Check your voter registration status online. [Vote.org](https://www.vote.org/am-i-registered-to-vote/) and the [National Association of Secretaries of State](https://www.nass.org/can-I-vote/voter-registration-status) (NASS) can help.

* Are you (still) registered?
* Is your street address correct?
* If necessary, apply or reapply ASAP.
  * If you’re able and if your local government allows it, consider emailing or faxing your voter registration forms and documents, rather than mailing them.
  * If mailing the application, allow two or three weeks for the application to arrive, to be on the safe side.
  * You may need to follow up to make sure your application has been accepted and is valid.


## Decide how you will submit your ballot

Consider voting by mail or voting absentee, in order to keep yourself and others safe during the Covid-19 pandemic. If you can’t vote remotely, or prefer not to do so, *try to vote early*. By voting before Election Day, you’ll not only ensure that your vote is counted, you’ll keep yourself and others safer.

### Voting by mail

Some states, such as Colorado, vote entirely by mail every year—ballots are sent to all registered voters before an election. Otherwise, voting absentee lets you vote by mail, usually because you physically can’t go to the polls. This year, many states have fewer restrictions on absentee voting because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Depending on your state, you may need to cite fear of Covid-19 as a justification for voting absentee.

* If you need to, apply to vote by mail ASAP.
  * If you’re able and if your local government allows it, consider submitting your application without mailing it, by:
    * applying online,
    * emailing or faxing the application, or
    * hand-delivering the application.
  * If mailing the application, allow at least a week for the application to arrive. Two or three weeks to be on the safe side.
  * You may need to follow up to make sure your application has been accepted and is valid.
* Some places will offer secure drop boxes for returning your ballot.
  * If you have concerns about leaving your ballot in one of these boxes, check the website of your local election authority. They may have information about their security measures, such as:
    * placing ballot boxes in high-traffic areas,
    * placing ballot boxes in areas monitored by security cameras,
    * sending a bipartisan team to pick up ballots,
    * etc.
  * Ballots are collected from these boxes regularly.
* If you plan to mail your ballot, try to get it to the post office ASAP—ideally, within a few days after you receive it.
  * Again, to be on the safe side, expect two or three weeks of transit.
* You may have the option to track your ballot online, so you’ll be able to see when it arrives.

Some states will only accept mail-in ballots up until the polls close on Election Day. Others will accept mail-in ballots that have been postmarked by Election Day, regardless of when they arrive. There are ongoing lawsuits over how states should handle mail-in ballots this year—consider checking your state’s vote-by-mail guidelines every so often.

### Voting in person

This is important to recognize: America is in a public health crisis. Covid-19 spreads quickly, and it will still be here in November. The pandemic adds risk to your trip to the polls. The risk of Covid-19 is not just risk that *you* will get it. It is also risk that *your family* will get it, and the people that *they* come into contact with as well. It is also risk that you will *give* the virus to others at the polls: people in line, poll workers, election judges, poll monitors, and all *their* family.

If you’re voting in person, make plans to keep the risk of infection low, both for yourself and for others:

* Try to vote early and during off-peak times.
* Wear a mask over your nose and mouth while waiting in line, and indoors at the polling station.
* Do not touch your face or the fabric of your mask.
* Keep to a distance of at least 6 feet from other people.
* Show respect for everyone else voting in-person, but especially show respect for poll workers, who will face increased risk to themselves and their families.
* As soon as you can after voting, disinfect and/or wash your hands for 20 seconds.

If you need to take time off of work in order to vote, check the guidelines for your area. About 30 states have laws expressing your right to do so, usually with advance notice to your employer. Request time off from your employer ASAP.

* Your employer may have their own guidelines on requests to vote during work hours.
* If your employer denies you anything guaranteed to you by law, make sure they know that the law that supports you.
  * Try to leave a paper or email trail when following up on your request.
  * Be clear that you’re asking for time off to vote under state law.
  * States may have information sheets for you to share.
  * If your employer doesn’t back down, be loud about their illegal behavior!
  * Check your state government’s website. You may be able to file a complaint against your employer.

States differ on:
  * whether you need to meet certain criteria in order for your request to be protected by law;
  * whether you need to give notice to your employer, and how far in advance you need to do this;
  * the amount of time you’ll have to vote;
  * whether your time off must be paid or unpaid; and
  * whether you need to give your employer proof that you voted.


## __VOTE__

* Follow the instructions on your ballot carefully.
  * Make sure you’re using a ballpoint pen with dark ink.
  * Make sure your marks heavy and dark.
  * Try not to give anyone any excuse to say that your ballot is invalid.
* Do *not* take a photo of your ballot. Doing so may invalidate it.
  * However, you do have the right to talk about who you voted for.
* If you’re voting in person, try to do so during off-peak times.
    * Follow guidelines on reducing the spread of Covid-19.
    * ... <!-- If you're disenfranchised at your polling place... -->
    * If it’s time for the polls to close and you haven’t voted yet, *remain in line.* If you leave, you will not be able to cast a ballot in person.
* Tell people that you’ve voted!
  * Voting is always important, but this year it’s *really* important.
  * By sharing the fact that you voted, you’re helping to normalize the idea that voting is important and that people care about it.
  * Try not to be dismissive of people who don’t intend to vote.
    * If you’re able, talk about it. Ask them why they’ve made that choice.
    * But don’t feel obligated to waste energy on someone who refuses to listen and won’t acknowledge your opinions.


## Prepare to wait for the results

With so many people voting by mail this year, **no one will know the outcome of the election for _weeks_**.

* Many states are scrambling to put infrastructure in place to process so many the paper ballots.
* Some states can’t legally count mail-in ballots until Election Day. ([National Conference of State Legislatures](https://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/absentee-and-mail-voting-policies-in-effect-for-the-2020-election.aspx))
* States that allow ballots to be postmarked by Election Day will have to count ballots as they arrive.

Beyond the logistics of voting during the Covid-19 pandemic, there’s also the reality of voting under the Trump administration:

* Expect lawsuits.
  * Expect lawsuits over the validity of ballots.
  * Expect lawsuits over how long local governments are allowed to tally results.
  * Expect lawsuits over voter suppression tactics by local governments and poll workers.
* Expect constant analysis and predictions from pretty much everyone.
  * Expect premature declarations of victory by Trump.
* Try not to expect an outcome until one candidate concedes.

The wait is going to be painful, protracted, exhausting. <!-- What can I do after? -->


## What can we do now?

I feel hopeless a lot these days. Everything feels like too much. For me, despair and frustration come from feeling powerless, from feeling alone. Compiling this information was a way for me to start working past those feelings through acting, and by reaching out. The list in this section is just as much for myself as it is for you.

* We can put pressure on our local officials to add ballot dropboxes, and to make sure there is enough personal protective equipment for poll workers.
* We can mail or email the members of the [USPS Board of Governors](https://about.usps.com/who/leadership/board-governors/) to express our experiences and worries about recent USPS service rollbacks. ([Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/NastyOldWomyn/status/1294349964966006788))
* We can call our representatives and senators to demand funding and support for the U.S. Postal Service.
  * Legislation (as of 2020-09-09):
    * [H.R. 8015: Delivering for America Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr8015),
    * [H.R. 6800: The Heroes Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr6800)
    * [H.R. 7015: Postal Preservation Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr7015)
    * [S. 2965: The USPS Fairness Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/s2965)
  * If they’ve already gone on the record in support, let’s thank them for it!
  * We can keep calls short and focused on one issue.
  * Here’s an example introduction: “Hi, I’m [ name ] and I’m a constituent living at [ address ]. I urge the [ Senator, Representative ] to...”
* We can join local “get out the vote” campaigns.
  * We might send [text messages](https://www.mobilize.us/2020victory/) or [hand-written postcards](https://postcardstovoters.org/) reminding people to vote.
  * We might drive voters to ballot drop boxes or polling places.
  * We might bring water and food to people waiting in line.
* We can consider [applying to be a poll worker](https://www.workelections.com/), if our health and circumstances allow it.
  * Poll workers are often retirees. Many will choose not to risk their lives this year, and they shouldn’t have to make that choice.
  * If there aren’t enough poll workers, the number of polling places might go down.
  * With fewer polling places, there will be longer lines and everyone will have a higher risk of infection.
* In some states, we may be able to strengthen the voting process in other ways:
  * We might volunteer to work as a translator or interpreter.
  * We might volunteer to greet and direct voters.
  * We might volunteer to register voters.
  * We might volunteer to monitor the polls.
  * We might volunteer to count votes.
* We can fill out the [2020 U.S. Census form](https://2020census.gov/) ASAP.
  * Among other things, information from the Census is used to determine how many seats our states get in the U.S. House of Representatives.

We can look for all the people quietly helping in the background. We can look to all the people loudly demanding change. We can look at all the people standing beside us. We can *be* these people for others.

Finally: just living can be an act of resistance, of defiance. It’s okay if some days, that’s all we can manage.

Commit message:

Be clearer: this document is not neutral
Added a table of contents to individual sections. Removed some
unneccessary emphasis.

README.md, after:

# So You Want to Vote in Fascist America

2020 is a difficult year to have a U.S. presidential election. Between the Covid-19 pandemic and voter disenfrancisement, we’re facing an election season full of fear and confusion. I compiled this document and a [companion list of resources](./sources-and-resources.md) to try to cut through that confusion and give others a place to start planning their vote.

**The information here was not compiled in a vacuum, and it is *not* comprehensive.** There are questions I have not thought to ask, and scenarios I have not considered. For transparency, some notes about me: I only have lived experience with voting in Illinois and Massachusetts. I am white and Mexican, and genderqueer. I have:

* never been homeless;
* never had a police record;
* never had a problem getting an ID;
* never had to ask for time off to vote;
* never been told at my polling place that I was not registered or allowed to vote.

I am liberal in my politics. I’m writing this now because I see American democracy threatened by fascism. [I don’t use that word lightly.](./why-now.md) I think it’s important that we vote Trump out of office, and that we give Democrats the congressional power to undo the damage he’s wrought.

I believe it’s important to give everyone the information to vote, even if you’re voting for Trump. Our right to vote is threatened now even more than usual, and this year, everyone needs to plan how to safely exercise that right. But I’m not going to pretend to be neutral on this.

Again, **this information is not comprehensive.** I plan to update these documents when I can (there’s a record of my changes [here](https://github.com/amclark42/so-youre-planning-to-vote-2020/commits/main)). Even so, check the rules of your local election authority, and whenever you can, confirm that my information is correct. Misinformation about the election is not just abundant but being intentionally spread. I’m not immune to misinformation! In 2016, I reblogged Russian propaganda, believing it was truth. I encourage you to check my work.

1. [Make sure you’re registered](#make-sure-youre-registered)
2. [Decide how you will submit your ballot](#decide-how-you-will-submit-your-ballot)
  1. [Voting by mail](#voting-by-mail)
  2. [Voting in person](#voting-in-person)
3. *[Vote](#vote)*
4. [Prepare to wait for results](#prepare-to-wait-for-results)
5. [What can we do now?](#what-can-we-do-now)


## Make sure you’re registered

Check your voter registration status online. [Vote.org](https://www.vote.org/am-i-registered-to-vote/) and the [National Association of Secretaries of State](https://www.nass.org/can-I-vote/voter-registration-status) (NASS) can help.

* Are you (still) registered?
* Is your street address correct?
* If necessary, apply or reapply ASAP.
  * If you’re able and if your local government allows it, consider emailing or faxing your voter registration forms and documents, rather than mailing them.
  * If mailing the application, allow two or three weeks for the application to arrive, to be on the safe side.
  * You may need to follow up to make sure your application has been accepted and is valid.


## Decide how you will submit your ballot

Consider voting by mail or voting absentee, in order to keep yourself and others safe during the Covid-19 pandemic. If you can’t vote remotely, or prefer not to do so, *try to vote early*. By voting before Election Day, you’ll not only ensure that your vote is counted, you’ll keep yourself and others safer.

### Voting by mail

Some states, such as Colorado, vote entirely by mail every year—ballots are sent to all registered voters before an election. Otherwise, voting absentee lets you vote by mail, usually because you physically can’t go to the polls. This year, many states have fewer restrictions on absentee voting because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Depending on your state, you may need to cite fear of Covid-19 as a justification for voting absentee.

* If you need to, apply to vote by mail ASAP.
  * If you’re able and if your local government allows it, consider submitting your application without mailing it, by:
    * applying online,
    * emailing or faxing the application, or
    * hand-delivering the application.
  * If mailing the application, allow at least a week for the application to arrive. Two or three weeks to be on the safe side.
  * You may need to follow up to make sure your application has been accepted and is valid.
* Some places will offer secure drop boxes for returning your ballot.
  * If you have concerns about leaving your ballot in one of these boxes, check the website of your local election authority. They may have information about their security measures, such as:
    * placing ballot boxes in high-traffic areas,
    * placing ballot boxes in areas monitored by security cameras,
    * sending a bipartisan team to pick up ballots,
    * etc.
  * Ballots are collected from these boxes regularly.
* If you plan to mail your ballot, try to get it to the post office ASAP—ideally, within a few days after you receive it.
  * Again, to be on the safe side, expect two or three weeks of transit.
* You may have the option to track your ballot online, so you’ll be able to see when it arrives.

Some states will only accept mail-in ballots up until the polls close on Election Day. Others will accept mail-in ballots that have been postmarked by Election Day, regardless of when they arrive. There are ongoing lawsuits over how states should handle mail-in ballots this year—consider checking your state’s vote-by-mail guidelines every so often.

### Voting in person

This is important to recognize: America is in a public health crisis. Covid-19 spreads quickly, and it will still be here in November. The pandemic adds risk to your trip to the polls. The risk of Covid-19 is not just risk that *you* will get it. It is also risk that *your family* will get it, and the people that *they* come into contact with as well. It is also risk that you will *give* the virus to others at the polls: people in line, poll workers, election judges, poll monitors, and all *their* families.

If you’re voting in person, make plans to keep the risk of infection low, both for yourself and for others:

* Try to vote early and during off-peak times.
* Wear a mask over your nose and mouth while waiting in line, and indoors at the polling station.
* Do not touch your face or the fabric of your mask.
* Keep to a distance of at least 6 feet from other people.
* Show respect for everyone else voting in-person, but especially show respect for poll workers, who will face increased risk to themselves and their families.
* As soon as you can after voting, disinfect and/or wash your hands for 20 seconds.

If you need to take time off of work in order to vote, check the guidelines for your area. About 30 states have laws expressing your right to do so, usually with advance notice to your employer. Request time off from your employer ASAP.

* Your employer may have their own guidelines on requests to vote during work hours.
* If your employer denies you anything guaranteed to you by law, make sure they know that the law that supports you.
  * Try to leave a paper or email trail when following up on your request.
  * Be clear that you’re asking for time off to vote under state law.
  * States may have information sheets for you to share.
  * If your employer doesn’t back down, be loud about their illegal behavior!
  * Check your state government’s website. You may be able to file a complaint against your employer.

States differ on:
  * whether you need to meet certain criteria in order for your request to be protected by law;
  * whether you need to give notice to your employer, and how far in advance you need to do this;
  * the amount of time you’ll have to vote;
  * whether your time off must be paid or unpaid; and
  * whether you need to give your employer proof that you voted.


## *VOTE*

* Follow the instructions on your ballot carefully.
  * Make sure you’re using a ballpoint pen with dark ink.
  * Make sure your marks heavy and dark.
  * Try not to give anyone any excuse to say that your ballot is invalid.
* Do *not* take a photo of your ballot. Doing so may invalidate it.
  * However, you do have the right to talk about who you voted for.
* If you’re voting in person, try to do so during off-peak times.
    * Follow guidelines on reducing the spread of Covid-19.
    * ... <!-- If you're disenfranchised at your polling place... -->
    * If it’s time for the polls to close and you haven’t voted yet, *remain in line.* If you leave, you will not be able to cast a ballot in person.
* Tell people that you’ve voted!
  * Voting is always important, but this year it’s *really* important.
  * By sharing the fact that you voted, you’re helping to normalize the idea that voting is important and that people care about it.
  * Try not to be dismissive of people who don’t intend to vote.
    * If you’re able, talk about it. Ask them why they’ve made that choice.
    * But don’t feel obligated to waste energy on someone who refuses to listen and won’t acknowledge your opinions.


## Prepare to wait for the results

With so many people voting by mail this year, **no one will know the outcome of the election for weeks**.

* Many states are scrambling to put infrastructure in place to process so many the paper ballots.
* Some states can’t legally count mail-in ballots until Election Day. ([National Conference of State Legislatures](https://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/absentee-and-mail-voting-policies-in-effect-for-the-2020-election.aspx))
* States that allow ballots to be postmarked by Election Day will have to count ballots as they arrive, within a set timeframe.

Beyond the logistics of voting during the Covid-19 pandemic, there’s also the reality of voting under the Trump administration:

* Expect lawsuits.
  * Expect lawsuits over the validity of ballots.
  * Expect lawsuits over how long local governments are allowed to tally results.
  * Expect lawsuits over voter suppression tactics by local governments and poll workers.
* Expect constant analysis and predictions from pretty much everyone.
  * Expect premature declarations of victory by Trump.
* Try not to expect an outcome until one candidate concedes.

The wait is going to be painful, protracted, exhausting. <!-- What can I do after? -->


## What can we do right now?

I feel hopeless a lot these days. Everything feels like too much. For me, despair and frustration come from feeling powerless, from feeling alone. Compiling this information was a way for me to start working past those feelings through acting, and by reaching out. The list in this section is just as much for myself as it is for you.

* We can put pressure on our local officials to add ballot dropboxes, and to make sure there is enough personal protective equipment for poll workers.
* We can mail or email the members of the [USPS Board of Governors](https://about.usps.com/who/leadership/board-governors/) to express our experiences and worries about recent USPS service rollbacks. ([Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/NastyOldWomyn/status/1294349964966006788))
* We can call our representatives and senators to demand funding and support for the U.S. Postal Service.
  * Legislation (as of 2020-09-09):
    * [H.R. 8015: Delivering for America Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr8015),
    * [H.R. 6800: The Heroes Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr6800)
    * [H.R. 7015: Postal Preservation Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/hr7015)
    * [S. 2965: The USPS Fairness Act](https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/116/s2965)
  * If they’ve already gone on the record in support, let’s thank them for it!
  * We can keep calls short and focused on one issue.
  * Here’s an example introduction: “Hi, I’m [ name ] and I’m a constituent living at [ address ]. I urge the [ Senator, Representative ] to...”
* We can join local “get out the vote” campaigns.
  * We might send [text messages](https://www.mobilize.us/2020victory/) or [hand-written postcards](https://postcardstovoters.org/) reminding people to vote.
  * We might drive voters to ballot drop boxes or polling places.
  * We might bring water and food to people waiting in line.
* We can consider [applying to be a poll worker](https://www.workelections.com/), if our health and circumstances allow it.
  * Poll workers are often retirees. Many will choose not to risk their lives this year, and they shouldn’t have to make that choice.
  * If there aren’t enough poll workers, the number of polling places might go down.
  * With fewer polling places, there will be longer lines and everyone will have a higher risk of infection.
* In some states, we may be able to strengthen the voting process in other ways:
  * We might volunteer to work as a translator or interpreter.
  * We might volunteer to greet and direct voters.
  * We might volunteer to register voters.
  * We might volunteer to monitor the polls.
  * We might volunteer to count votes.
* We can fill out the [2020 U.S. Census form](https://2020census.gov/) ASAP.
  * Among other things, information from the Census is used to determine how many seats our states get in the U.S. House of Representatives.

We can look for all the people quietly helping in the background. We can look to all the people loudly demanding change. We can look at all the people standing beside us. We can *be* these people for others.

Finally: just living can be an act of resistance, of defiance. It’s okay if some days, that’s all we can manage.
